July 22--JANESVILLE -- All John and Brittney Mansur knew about the Fourth Ward before moving into the neighborhood was its bad reputation, but they wanted to be part of a turnaround.
They are in their early 30s, and other than when they attended college, they have always lived in Janesville.
They are among Fourth Ward residents working to improve the neighborhood that has historically had higher rates of crime and poverty than the rest of Janesville.
The couple and their young children have been living in the Fourth Ward for a year. As leaders of the neighborhood action team, the Mansurs help organize area Fourth of July parades, Halloween trick-or-treats and cultural events.
John wishes the neighborhood looked better, but that's not a top priority for him.
"It's easy for someone to drive through the neighborhood and see something like that and think it's a problem," Mansur said. "It's nothing compared to not knowing where your next meal is going to come from. Yes, I'd like the neighborhood to have a better look, but there are more pressing issues I think than making sure the lawn is perfect."
First impressions
A drive through the Fourth Ward could reveal a row of stately 19th-century homes with ornate gables and blooming lilies.
But around the corner might be weary-looking houses with chipped paint on clapboard siding and dandelions overrunning the lawns.
Such signs of distress can leave a lasting impression for Fourth Ward visitors with no connection to the neighborhood.
Longtime residents feel this central city neighborhood has earned an unfair stigma from those who haven't visited the area in years, if ever.
Teresa McKeown is the chairwoman of the Fourth Ward committee, a resident group that keeps track of potential crime and passes the info to the police.
"It's frustrating because even the Realtors in Janesville try to talk people out of living in the Fourth Ward or buying a property in the Fourth Ward," said McKeown, who has lived on Jackson Street for 22 years. "That's preventing good people from owning homes, here, which makes a lot of difference."
"The more the stigma is promoted, the more it sticks. But it is not the O.K. Corral that people seem to think it is."
In May 2017, the Fourth Ward was the location for Janesville's first homicide in three years. That was followed several months later by a gruesome fatal stabbing that reinforced negative stereotypes.
McKeown points out that the people suspected of committing those crimes had no roots in Janesville and were either newcomers or strangers to the area.
But she acknowledges the shortcomings of the Fourth Ward, a neighborhood bounded by Court Street, Center Avenue and the Rock River. Besides the killings, she has seen drug deals in broad daylight, public urination on front lawns and noisy parties that spill into the street.
Landlord trouble
Jennifer Arndt's family has lived in and owned rentals in the Fourth Ward for 25 years. She's picky about her tenants and said bad landlords have made it difficult for her to rent out some of her apartments.
"A real problem in this neighborhood is that investors come in and buy properties, and they don't care who they rent to. They don't check criminal backgrounds," Arndt said. "They don't care whatsoever. All they care about is getting the money."
She routinely cleans trash from the front yards of rental properties that aren't hers, she said.
Landlords whose properties receive a complaint and are found to be in violation of city policies get a deadline to correct the problems. If issues continue, the city can label the property a chronic nuisance, Housing Services Director Kelly Bedessem said.
Earning a chronic nuisance distinction leads to a meeting with the police department and housing division. For the next year, additional code violations or police calls could lead to extra fines, she said.
Creating community
Kay and Neil Deupree have lived in the Fourth Ward since 1997 and are part of the neighborhood action team. If a neighbor has a chronically unkempt lawn, they will encourage the person to take better care of the property, Kay said.
"Who wants to live next to a place that is rundown? Who wants to have it in their neighborhood?" Neil said. "What would happen if one of the outlying areas of Janesville, if there were a landlord that didn't take care of his property, and everybody else had their lawns mowed immaculately and there was one that didn't?"
"Do you suppose the city wouldn't be getting telephone calls about that?"
Kay Deupree said the neighborhood action team and Fourth Ward committee are key to the area's revitalization. Research shows resident-driven change has a more lasting effect than help from outside groups.
The Deuprees's community activism formed when the couple lived on Cleveland's near west side, an old, diverse neighborhood.
"There was a great group of neighborhood folks (in Cleveland) who could see an issue and attack it. We had that kind of background in terms of where you live, you make a difference," Kay said. "If I want to feel proud of it, then I need to do my part."
Safe at home
McKeown said the Fourth Ward's safety issues change from year to year and can even vary between blocks. She credited the police department for taking a more active role in neighborhood patrols.
Police Chief Dave Moore said the police department concentrates extra patrols in the Fourth Ward and other neighborhoods such as Look West and downtown. Having an active patrol presence and attending community outings helps foster trust, he said.
He agreed criminal activity can ebb and flow from one street to the next. It's not the entire area that has problems, and the longer people categorize the entire Fourth Ward as being unsafe, the longer it will take for the neighborhood to recover, he said.
People sometimes question why the police department devotes more resources to the Fourth Ward. Moore believes the effort is worth it to prevent all of Janesville from being labeled as unsafe.
He compared it to Chicago; Milwaukee; and Rockford, Illinois, places where concentrated crime areas can taint the entire city's image.
"In those communities, there are wonderful neighborhoods that are largely crime free, but there are also pockets of neighborhoods where crime is prevalent. Those communities get judged on those pockets of crime, not the areas of the city that are crime free," Moore said. "That why it's important we do well in these neighborhoods so we're being viewed as being a safe community."
McKeown said her efforts to keep the Fourth Ward safe can be stressful, but it keeps her life exciting.
Another neighborhood might be more affluent and comfortable, but she thinks it would be boring. Those areas don't have the sense of a tight-knit community like the Fourth Ward does.
And in the Fourth Ward, she can use a feature of these majestic old homes to build neighborhood identity.
"Back in the day when this house was built, that front porch was so that you sat out there and conversed and talked with other neighbors. In this part of the city, we're not all hiding in our houses," McKeown said. "Nobody's on their phones or video games for the time we're talking to each other."
"I think it helps cement a stable and good community."
___ (c)2018 The Janesville Gazette (Janesville, Wis.) Visit The Janesville Gazette (Janesville, Wis.) at  Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.