A wild police beatdown that ended with two men bruised and bloodied has sparked an NYPD investigation into whether the cops used excessive force - with the mayor demanding answers about a "troubling" clash caught on video.
Cops were seen on video striking the two men with batons multiple times, and then piling onto one who ended up on the ground, kicking and hitting him. The footage came from a bystander's cell phone.
Two uniformed transit officers and three plainclothes officers took part in the bloody altercation Tuesday in Washington Heights, which allegedly erupted after the cops tried to nab the men for a minor transit crime.
"If people are on the ground and yet there's still physical action being taken, that concerns me," de Blasio said Wednesday at a press conference. "So I want to get some answers and I want to quickly hear from the NYPD."
Aaron Grissom, 36, of the Bronx, and Sidney Williams, 37, of Brooklyn, were charged with assault, resisting arrest and other crimes following the incident. Both have extensive criminal records and have been arrested for threatening cops before, officials said.
On a second video acquired by the Daily News, Williams boasts about his penchant for suing the NYPD.
"They don't like me but they can't touch me," Williams says as he sips a drink in the video recorded sometime before the Tuesday beatdown. "They get hurt and I get paid. I got three lawsuits, working on No. 4. Keep f---ing with me, police. I'm gonna show you what it is."
The brawl erupted about 2:30 p.m. Tuesday after straphangers complained that Grissom and Williams were smoking and bothering people on a set of stairs to the A and C subway line on Broadway near 169th St., police said.
The two uniformed cops, identified by sources as transit Police Officers Franklyn Mota and Bramlin Rosa, were on a fixed post at the station responding to community concerns about vagrants loitering in the subways when they heard about Grissom and Williams bothering people nearby.
Law enforcement sources told The News one of the cops approached the two men and told them to leave. They refused. As the cops drew closer, Grissom allegedly swung his fist at one of the officers but never connected. When the second cop stepped in to help, Williams jumped in and attacked him, the sources said.
In the video, Mota and Rosa are seen momentarily arguing with the two men - then the officers each whip out an expandable baton and rain blows upon Williams's head, back and shoulder, with one smack landing squarely in his face with an audible crack.
Grissom appears to lunge at one of the officers and the two move off camera for a few seconds. They reappear with Grissom on the ground next to a parked car with both officers whaling on him with batons.
As the cops continue to strike him with batons, two detectives and a plainclothes officer run over to help the transit officers. One of the detectives is seen throwing at least one kick to Grissom's side.
Officers hit Grissom at least 16 times with batons on the head and body, the video shows. Cops are advised against striking anyone in the head with their batons, officials said.
Williams, meanwhile, wound up pushed against a sidewalk fence, brawling with other responding officers. As he was led away the scene, he left a pool of blood behind. He was later treated for a broken nose.
The NYPD said it was reviewing the incident. As of Wednesday, all of the officers involved remain on full duty.
"The incident is currently under investigation by Internal Affairs," an NYPD spokesman said in a statement. "The officers, who were aware of the local condition and familiar with the background of the two perpetrators, directed the males to depart the area over the course of approximately five minutes of interaction. The males refused to comply and when officers moved to initiate arrest, they resisted and one of the males attempted to punch the officers."
A police source said the video starts about five minutes after the confrontation with Grissom and Williams began to heat up.
Witnesses on the recording said the two men attacked the police first.
"They were telling them to move from there, and they refused, and between them two attacked the policeman," one witness in the video can be heard saying in Spanish. "These guys are disrespectful around here, because the police has to be respected."
The entire ordeal was reportedly caught on the officers's body cameras, sources said.
"Their video better have that first swing," one source said. "If not, they're done for."
The 6-foot-5 Grissom, who lives in a shelter, has been arrested 26 times stretching back to 2000 - seven of which are sealed - and was arrested for menacing a police officer at the exact same station on Dec. 5, 2018, with Williams.
In that incident, cops had asked the two to stop loitering at the station when Grissom took a swing at him. Williams threatened the cops with a baseball bat before dropping it onto the platform. Both men had K2 on them.
"We are going to get you," the suspects said according to court papers. "You're going to get what's coming to you."
Williams has been arrested seven times since 2011, four of which were for fighting with police or resisting arrest, according to sources.
In 2017 Grissom and Williams both sued the NYPD, claiming an officer and sergeant beat them outside a pizzeria in Harlem.
Patrick Lynch, the president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, the NYPD's largest police union, accused Williams and Grissom of deliberately provoking the cops who beat them and said the video was "staged."
"This is the kind of outrageous and offensive behavior that NYC police officers have to deal with routinely," Lynch said. "It underscores the reason why all such videos should be ignored until the totality of circumstances are revealed through a thorough investigation. This case is a perfect example of why our city's leaders should not react in any way to uninvestigated videos promoted through social media."
Grissom and Williams were awaiting arraignment at Manhattan Criminal Court late Wednesday.
With Adam Schrader, Kerry Burke,
Shayna Jacobs, Elizabeth Elizalde
and John Annese