Sept. 07--     Sep. 7--A Hazleton man is accused of holding his girlfriend captive for days, setting fire to her home on another occasion and breaking down a door to get to her during a third encounter.
State police at Hazleton and Hazleton police were looking for Julio Santiago Torres, 27, for those crimes this summer. They apprehended him Friday in Schuylkill County, along with the woman he's accused of victimizing after police said she tried to hide his whereabouts so he could avoid arrest.
Santiago Torres was charged in three criminal cases and denied bail by Magisterial District Judge James Dixon, Hazle Twp., Friday morning.
He was brought into the courtroom shackled and only spoke when the judge questioned him as he determined what his bail should be.
Dixon learned Santiago Torres had a prior criminal record in New York and was wanted for failure to appear locally, though when asked about his criminal history, Santiago Torres mentioned only a time where he was caught driving without a license, saying he couldn't remember the rest.
"(It) sounds like a heck of a lot more than traffic offenses," Dixon said.
The judge went on to explain why bail is set -- to ensure defendants show up for all court appearances and also to protect the victims and the public. Based on those two reasons, Dixon denied him bail in all three cases he faces.
Troopers took him to jail shortly afterward.
Hazleton police charged him with felonies for strangulation and false imprisonment and two misdemeanors for simple assault for holding his girlfriend, Lucy A. Dejesus-Nieves, 26, Shenandoah , against her will at a Hazleton home June 8.
Troopers, meanwhile, lodged two cases against him. He was charged with eight counts of arson and one count of reckless burning or exploding, all felonies, for a June 12 fire at Dejesus-Nieves's home in the Hollywood section of Hazle Twp. He also was charged with criminal trespass, a felony, and criminal mischief, a misdemeanor, for a July 8 incident at the woman's sister's apartment in Hazle Twp.
Dejesus-Nieves was charged with a felony for hindering apprehension or prosecution by troopers and taken to jail after failing to post 10% of $25,000 bail set by Magisterial District Judge Anthony J. Kilker, Shenandoah.
Their arrests came after troopers from Hazleton and agents from the U.S. Marshals Service Fugitive Task Force went to 231 N. Diamond St., Shenandoah, around 6 a.m. Friday to take Santiago Torres into custody on the warrants.
Trooper Gary Sanzi said a person who opened the door reported Santiago Torres was in a third floor bedroom. When entry to the home was made, the man attempted to exit through a third floor window, confirming his presence in the building.
Sanzi said authorities found Dejesus-Nieves in a third floor bedroom and were told by the woman that she didn't know where Santiago-Torres was.
During a subsequent search of that room, Sanzi said, officers found Santiago Torres hiding behind a headboard of a bed and took him into custody.
Sanzi said Dejesus-Nieves was told numerous times that Santiago Torres was wanted and advised to call police if she knew his whereabouts.
The trooper also said that Dejesus-Nieves was found in the same bedroom as Santiago Torres and that she appeared to be sleeping prior to officers entering.
According to arrest papers:
Hazleton police found Dejesus-Nieves at Lehigh Valley Hospital-Hazleton on June 8 as she received treatment stemming from a domestic assault involving Santiago Torres.
She claimed he held her against her will for four days inside a home on North Manhattan Court after picking her up June 3 at her sister's home at Hazleton Apartments, West 24th Street, to talk.
He took her to his parents's home in the 700 block of North Manhattan Court and brought her to the third floor attic bedroom and held here there, biting her above her left eyebrow and leaving teeth marks still visible when police interviewed her at the hospital days later.
He also grabbed her by her hair and with his other hand on her neck, restricted her breathing. Santiago Torres yelled at the woman, grabbed her roughly by her arms, accused her of infidelity and stabbed her with an ink pen in her right knee.
While being held in the home, she was fed but wasn't allowed her cellphone and wasn't allowed to use the bathroom unless in his company. She was confined in the room after the attic door was nailed shut. The nails were removed each morning so she could use the bathroom, and then the door again was nailed shut.
On June 8, Santiago Torres told her to shower and not tell anyone what happened, and that he would bring her to her mother's home.
Four days later, her house at 4183 Hollywood Blvd. caught fire just before 2 a.m. Hazle Twp. firefighters were able to minimize the damage but the flames left a lot of damage to that side of the house and destroyed a Jeep Liberty parked near the rear of the home.
Four people were inside the 4183 side and two were on the 4187 side, all of them escaping unharmed.
State police fire marshals investigated, determining the fire was set.
Troopers also learned Santiago Torres had an ongoing domestic issue with one of the fire victims, Dejesus-Nieves. He was known to use his brother's Honda Fit, a vehicle that was spotted at the fire scene by a witness before the flames erupted.
That witness saw a man park the vehicle across the street and walk over to the home. He knocked at the door but when no one answered went to the rear of the home where it's believed the fire started and within two minutes, ran back to the Honda and drove away.
Through interviews troopers said they also learned a person claiming to be Santiago Torres called the victim to apologize for the June 12 fire.
Lastly, on July 8, while Dejesus-Nieves was at her sister's apartment at Hazleton Apartments, Santiago Torres banged at the door but her sister wouldn't let him in and told him to leave.
He continued to bang on and kick the door until it broke and swung open. Once inside he tried to get Dejesus-Nieves to leave but fled when police arrived.
Contact the writers: fandruscavage@republicanherald.com; 570-928-6013; achristman@standardspeaker.com; 570-501-3584
___ (c)2019 the Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pa.) Visit the Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pa.) at standardspeaker.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.