Protests in and around Pittsburgh remained peaceful on Sunday, a day after larger demonstrations turned violent in Downtown.
Hundreds of people gathered in Downtown, East Liberty and other regions of southwestern Pennsylvania to speak out against the death of George Floyd, an African American man who died in police custody in Minneapolis.
Meanwhile, city officials continued to assess the damage that occurred in Downtown to more than 70 buildings and other city and private properties. Police on Sunday said they identified and obtained an arrest warrant for a Shaler man whom they accused of inciting the violence by breaking out the windows of a marked police car on Centre Avenue.
Mayor Bill Peduto blamed the violence that occurred after the police car had its windows smashed by a group of about 100 people - some local and some from out of state - who he said were not connected to the organizers of the peaceful demonstration.
"We know that it was not led by the organizers of the march," Mr. Peduto said. "Young black leaders who organized that march were not involved in the destruction that we saw."
Police said they believe Brian Jordan Bartels, 20, broke out the windows of the marked police car even after protest organizers tried to stop him. Police charged him with institutional vandalism, rioting and reckless endangerment of another person.
Police from multiple jurisdictions and the FBI served and executed a search warrant at a home in Shaler in an attempt to locate Mr. Bartels. They did not find him, but they said they found evidence linking him to the crime.
After the windows were smashed out of the police car, Pittsburgh's mounted patrol units surrounded the vehicle and clashed with nearby demonstrators. Mr. Peduto said the mounted officers moved away from the vehicle when it was set ablaze and the city's special response team responded. The special response team then shot tear gas into the crowd.
Once the vehicle was set ablaze, Mr. Peduto said, police had to get people to leave the area.
"If the car blows up, you have people there with their children who would have been killed," the mayor said. "And so yes, there's going to be a police presence, and yes, it's going to be in full gear to protect themselves as well."
Mr. Peduto said the total cost of the damage, which included smashed windows, graffiti and overturned garbage cans and large flower pots has not been determined. Police arrested more than 40 people Saturday.
Despite police using tear gas against protesters a day earlier, over 100 people showed up on Sunday for a Downtown protest organized by Pittsburgh I Can't Breathe. It began in Market Square.
"As soon as we got here, police talked to us and told us we can't gather here," Deisa, an organizer who declined to give her last name, said.
She stayed on site and continued preparing.
"This is for George. This is for Antwon Rose. This is for our sons, our brothers and our cousins," she said.
The group went up to the Allegheny County Courthouse, where riot police awaited the demonstrators. Protesters formed a circle and began spray painting "BLM," "I Can't Breathe" and other slogans on the street. The name of Antown Rose II, who was shot and killed by East Pittsburgh police in 2018, was evoked repeatedly.
A protester who declined to give his name said he wanted to show solidarity.
"It's more important to stand up for what's right than it is to worry about getting tear-gassed," he said.
Another protester shared the same concerns about possible police brutality.
"I was skeptical at first, but we're here for a good cause," said Jake, who declined to give his last name. "I'm feeling a rush."
Many passersby honked their horns and raised their fists to show support with the protesters. The group circled back around to Market Square and declared the protest a success.
In East Liberty, hundreds of people -- most wearing masks and social distancing as best they could - attended a vigil in the parking lot of Eastminster Presbyterian Church where they listened to calls for peace, unity and justice from faith leaders. Mr. Peduto also addressed the crowd.
Pastor Paul Roberts asked those at the gathering to remember the family of George Floyd, whose suffering, he said, has become lost amid riots in cities throughout the country.
"Getting lost in this are families that are so hurt, so tired, so worn down, so distraught, so in mourning," Mr. Roberts said. "So although there have been protests all over the country, I want us right now to in silence with our hands lifted up, pray for George Floyd's family. Pray for him, but we can't forget his family. We've lost him in this tragedy."
Just a few blocks away at the intersection of Penn and Centre avenues outside the East Liberty Target, about 15 peaceful protesters held signs and chanted as vehicles drove past them honking in approval.
The small rally was organized by Alexander Cash, 23, of East Liberty, and Elizya Powell, 21, of Lincoln-Lemington, who decided to come out to spread peace, love and positivity.
"Yesterday was so crazy," Mr. Cash said. "I feel like today, tomorrow, any other day, we need peace, not riots, not looting. What's that going to solve? That's not going to solve anything. The cops need to hear our voice."
Some of the demonstrators outside Target waved at Pittsburgh police officers as they drove by, and the officers waved back.
At one point, about 30 state police troopers in riot gear came to the small protest after someone reported looting in the area. There was no looting in the area, and the state police eventually left without confronting the protesters.
In Butler, about 100 protesters gathered in Diamond Park across the street from the Butler County Courthouse. A few dozen police officers, including some clad in riot gear, were close by.
Tensions increased around 5:50 p.m. when a white couple entered the crowd and began arguing with protesters. The couple left, and a man with a bullhorn said to ignore them.
A short time later, the protest became mobile and moved throughout Butler's business district. The group went past nine or 10 people toting military-style assault rifles in front of various businesses who were apparently looking to fend off looting.
Kristina Moore, a restaurant supervisor from Butler, who is white, said she joined the protest because she has a father who was a police officer and several friends who are people of color, so she knows there are issues that need to be addressed. She said she felt the police presence around the demonstration was heavier than it needed to be.
"It's been a little intimidating," she said. "When my sister and I were walking up here the first time, behind the courthouse we saw SWAT getting the trucks ready, and we were like, 'Why?' ... There's clearly nothing going on that warrants that level. It's not a riot. It's a protest. You don't need that."
Antaya Burns, a photographer from Butler, said she came to the protest because people of color need to be heard.
"This isn't stuff that we're making up. It's legitimate in the day-to-day life of a black person, of a person of color," she said. "And no one needs to fear leaving their house at the beginning of the day, questioning if they're going to make it home at the end of the day."